---
title: Docker Commands
tags: [Docker, Kubernetes, Containers]
style: fill
color: light
description: Basic docker commands 
---

Author: Pratik Gawade

Here is a list of commonly used Docker commands and their descriptions:

- **docker run**:
```
docker run hello-world
```
 Creates and runs a new container from a specified Docker image. It is used to start a new container from scratch or to start a container based on an existing image.

- **docker build**: is used to build a new Docker image from a Dockerfile. A Dockerfile is a text file that contains the instructions for building a Docker image.

- **docker ps**: lists all the running containers on your system. By default, it only lists the active containers, but you can add the `-a` flag to include all containers, including the stopped ones.

- **docker stop**: stops a running container. You can specify the container ID or name as an argument.

- **docker rm**: removes a stopped container from your system. You can specify the container ID or name as an argument.

- **docker images**: lists all the Docker images that are currently stored on your system.

- **docker pull**: downloads a Docker image from a registry, such as Docker Hub.

- **docker push**: uploads a Docker image to a registry, such as Docker Hub.

- **docker network**: used to manage Docker networks, which allow containers to communicate with each other.

- **docker exec**: allows you to execute a command within a running container. You can specify the container ID or name as well as the command to be executed.

- **docker logs**: displays the logs generated by a running container. You can specify the container ID or name as an argument.

- **docker inspect**: displays detailed information about a container or image. You can specify the container ID or name as an argument.

- **docker commit**: creates a new image from a running container. You can specify the container ID or name as an argument.

- **docker tag**: allows you to tag a Docker image with a specific name and version number.

- **docker volume**: is used to manage Docker volumes, which are used to store persistent data generated by Docker containers.

- **docker system**: provides information about the Docker system, such as the amount of disk space used by Docker images and containers.

___
### Docker Compose 
Here is a list of commonly used Docker Compose commands and their descriptions:
- **docker-compose**: used to manage multi-container Docker applications using a YAML file.

- **docker-compose up**: Starts all the services defined in a `docker-compose.yml` file.

- **docker-compose down**: Stops and removes all the containers created by `docker-compose up`, as well as any networks and volumes.

- **docker-compose build**: Builds the images defined in a `docker-compose.yml` file.

- **docker-compose stop**: Stops all the containers created by `docker-compose up`, but does not remove them.

- **docker-compose start**: Starts all the containers created by `docker-compose up`, but only if they were previously stopped.

- **docker-compose restart**: Restarts all the containers created by `docker-compose up`.

- **docker-compose ps**: Lists all the containers created by `docker-compose up`, along with their status.

- **docker-compose logs**: Displays the logs of all the containers created by `docker-compose up`.

- **docker-compose exec**: Executes a command inside a container created by `docker-compose up`.

- **docker-compose config**: Validates and displays the configuration of a `docker-compose.yml` file.

- **docker-compose images**: Lists all the images used by the services defined in a `docker-compose.yml` file.

- **docker-compose rm**: Removes all the containers created by `docker-compose up`.

- **docker-compose pull**: Pulls the latest versions of the images used by the services defined in a `docker-compose.yml` file.

- **docker-compose push**: Pushes the images used by the services defined in a `docker-compose.yml` file to a registry.
