---
title: Reactive properties in Vue.js
tags: [Vue.js]
style: 
color: 
description:
---

Author: Pratik Gawade 

In Vue.js, reactive properties are properties that are able to react to changes in other properties. This is a key feature of Vue.js that allows you to build dynamic and reactive user interfaces.

There are several types of reactive properties in Vue.js:

1. Data properties: These are the properties defined in the `data` object of a Vue component. When you define a data property, Vue automatically makes it reactive, which means that it will update the DOM whenever the property changes.

2. Computed properties: These are properties that are derived from one or more data properties using a computation. Computed properties are cached and only re-evaluated when their dependencies change. This makes them efficient for complex computations that need to be performed frequently.

3. Watchers: These are functions that are called whenever a data property or computed property changes. You can use watchers to perform side effects or trigger other changes based on changes in the underlying data.

4. Methods: These are functions defined in the `methods` object of a Vue component. While methods are not reactive in themselves, they can be used to modify reactive properties and trigger reactivity.

5. Props: These are properties that are passed down to a component from its parent component. Like data properties, props are reactive and can be used to trigger updates to the component's DOM.

Overall, these reactive properties in Vue.js allow you to create dynamic and reactive user interfaces by defining properties that respond to changes in other properties.

```html
<template>
  <div>
    <p>Count: {{ count }}</p>
    <p>Double: {{ double }}</p>
    <input type="text" ref="input" v-model="text" />
    <p>Text length: {{ textLength }}</p>
  </div>
</template>

<script>
export default {
  data() {
    return {
      count: 0,
      text: ''
    }
  },
  computed: {
    double() {
      return this.count * 2
    },
    textLength() {
      return this.text.length
    }
  },
  methods: {
    incrementCount() {
      this.count++
    }
  },
  watch: {
    count(newValue, oldValue) {
      console.log(`Count changed from ${oldValue} to ${newValue}`)
    }
  },
  mounted() {
    this.$refs.input.focus()
  }
}
</script>
```
In this example, we define a Vue component with a count data property that is initially set to 0, and a text data property that is used to bind to an input element using v-model. We define a computed property called double that returns the value of count multiplied by 2, and another computed property called textLength that returns the length of the text string.

We define a method called incrementCount that increases the value of count by 1, and a watcher that logs a message to the console whenever the count property changes.

Finally, we use the mounted lifecycle hook to set the focus on the input element using a ref.

In this example, whenever the count property changes, the watcher will log a message to the console. Whenever the text property changes, the textLength computed property will be updated, and the template will display the length of the text string. The double computed property will also be updated whenever the count property changes, and the template will display the doubled value of count. When the component is mounted, the mounted lifecycle hook will set the focus on the input element using a ref.

This example demonstrates how data properties, computed properties, watchers, and refs can be used together in a Vue component to create dynamic and reactive user interfaces.